My name is Farzana and I was born in Pakistan, in Faisalabad.
Now in English as well. My name is Farzana and I was born in Pakistan.
Where in Pakistan were you born?
I was born in Punjab, in a small town, Tomatek Singh.
My father, when he finished his job, he came to Faisalabad.
He lived there, he bought the shop before he was in the army.
When he finished in the army, he bought the shop and stayed near Faisalabad, near Tomatek Singh.
I was born there, and my brothers were born there. We lived our whole life over there, in Tomatek Singh.
I have a sixth brother, only sister. I was very, very spoiled.
I always played with the boys. I do play with the girls as well, but more with the boys, because in the house it's all boys.
I was in the middle. I was four older and two younger brothers. I was in the middle, so I just always played with the boys.
I have a very happy childhood. I have an education in Tomatek Singh as well.
Because in our house, education is more important than anything else.
What type of games did you play?
No girly games. I don't know the name or anything, but whatever the boys were playing, I just went and joined them and played with them.
They always called me Tom Boy. My eyes were always watering. I'm not a crime or anything.
I did education up to GCSE in Pakistan. As soon as I finished my education, I got married. Even the result came after I got married.
My husband and I went from here to Pakistan. It was an arranged marriage.
We got married and he came over and I didn't come with him because I didn't have a visa.
They always give us 18 months to apply and then they give us a visa. After 18 months, he went back and I came here.
What would you say is your favourite memory about childhood and also school?
School. I had a very good time in school.
My aunt built the school. She didn't have any children. She built the school and all the first children were us.
My cousins were very nice because my nephews and nieces all lived in one area and we stuck at the school.
After that, we were still there.
My cousins were older. I don't know how to explain it. It was very easy in school. I'm not very good with English.
English is terrible.
What was that experience like being married and waiting for your results?
I didn't even know what marriage was. I was living with my father in a different area.
My parents were living in Tobadak. It was quite distant.
They found us. He came to our house and they found us. Someone told us that they were young girls.
They arranged it. I didn't even know what marriage was because nobody told me.
I have an older brother and none of them got married at that age.
When I got married, I knew a little bit what marriage was like.
It was a different experience but my husband is very nice and gentle. He's a very good man.
He's a very big guy. He's of a different age. He said, don't worry, I'll look after you.
So here I am.
Is that the time you came to the UK? When did you come to the UK?
I came to the UK in 1976. When I came here, he didn't have any homes.
He was living with his uncle.
After two or three weeks, he said, let's go to Scotland for a holiday.
My sister and I went there. He said, I'll just go for a holiday.
We went there and she said, stay here, don't go.
Because I was living alone in this big island by myself. It's an Oasis.
I said, who said this? Because we didn't have any homes, he said, stay with me.
We stayed with her for about three months.
After that, they had a small house. Nobody used it.
We just got up. It's one bedroom, like a small place.
We moved in, in that house. After that, we just stayed there.
Life is very different when I moved up there.
Because the people didn't have bathroom facilities.
They used a portable toilet.
They didn't even have a carpet or anything.
They used sand.
They cleaned it every six months.
Like sand, take off.
On Sundays, you can't go out.
They just go to the church, worship.
But no housework, you can't put the washing out or anything.
They use a peat for burning.
They buy a lot in the summertime and they cut it into blocks.
They rent the land for six months and cut the peat.
They can bake blocks and dry it and use it for the winter time.
We did that as well.
Once or twice a week, the barn came for the grocery.
Because there was no shop, nothing.
Fresh milk is alright because the people keep the animals.
For the milk, eggs and potatoes, these things are alright.
But the rest of the stuff, the barn came down and we moved by grocery.
Then my first child born over there.
We got the house.
He started working on the building side.
For a few months, I think, he didn't like it.
Then he started doing the business door to door, selling stuff.
Because my brother-in-law, he's doing the door to door business.
Take the stuff and go door to door and sell the stuff.
He started doing that.
We stayed about six years over there.
My children were born on that island.
It's a different experience as well.
It's nice.
But if you have to go to the hospital, you have to go to the bail land.
That's in Glasgow.
You have to catch the flight or the ship.
No other transport.
No train, no bus, nothing.
On the weekends, nothing.
You can't go out.
If you want to go to the bail land, just five days.
That's a different experience for me.
We stayed there about six years after my youngest son was born.
He was alright before when he was born.
After six or eight months, then we noticed that he's not all there.
But we still stayed there about three years.
They said if he starts school, we have to send him to the bail land.
I can't send him to the bail land because in the hostel or whatever they sent him.
So I asked my son, let's go back to Newport.
So one summer we just came down here.
We didn't bring our stuff.
We just came down to see his brother lives here.
We just came down to see them.
We stayed with them for about three months and applied for the house.
Then after he brought the stuff, the council gave us the house.
We moved in and we were together.
I don't like the idea of sending the youngest one to the hostel or whatever they want to send him.
So then they take him to the school every day.
I know I'm sending him to school and he comes home in the night.
I was with him all the time.
It's alright then.
But I don't like the idea because wherever he's going, I have to be there.
What would you say was the most important thing that you had to leave behind?
How did you feel about it?
So leave behind one in Pakistan and also in Scotland.
Pakistan is a family.
All the family, my brother, everyone.
Good memories.
In Scotland, it's a different experience.
Which I haven't seen in Pakistan either because we have all the facilities in Pakistan.
When I came down here, the first time I saw the sea as well.
The sea is over there as well, but I haven't seen it.
That's different.
When I came to Newport, that's another different story.
What year then did you come to Newport?
We came down here in 1983.
Since then, we just sit in Newport now.
We moved three also.
We moved around in Newport, but still in Newport.
We're not going anywhere.
My daughter lives in London.
She said, come down here because only three of us are living here.
My husband's passed away.
She said, come down here.
We'll be all together.
I said, no, I'm happy here in Newport.
It's a nice, cozy place.
I don't want to leave by all these friends.
I'm like age-alive.
Other groups I go.
Every day I go out and enjoy myself, see my friends, have a good time.
Seeing them and talking to them is nice to me.
It's different like staying home and all that.
I want to work all my life.
They always call me Lady Leisure.
I said, okay, yes.
What do you remember or recall about the first few days or few months that you were in Newport?
It was very different.
When I came here, I think it was April or May.
What I don't remember is March.
It's snowing.
One week after, it's snowing.
It's so different.
It's cold.
I was young.
I didn't feel cold.
Now I feel cold.
But everything is different.
The way the people live.
How do I explain it?
And no family here.
It's very isolated as well.
It's like staying in.
Only one or two people I know.
I can go and see them.
Otherwise, not many people.
If the people are there, but I don't know them.
Only one or two people I know.
Just go and see them.
Just busy with the children.
I spend most of the time with my children.
Give more time to them.
When they're not there, they're in school.
Then I go out and see my friends.
Otherwise, no.
Since they're gone, educated and doing their work.
I was so depressed.
Because my children, my daughters, my boys, they're like friends to me as well.
When they're gone, I was so depressed.
I joined one group like Asiana.
A long time ago.
15 years ago, I think.
I joined that group.
From there, I see more and more people.
I know them and make friends with them.
Then start going out.
I join lots of groups now.
I can't stay home now.
I'm so bad.
How has that been?
Growing more friends and connections in Newport?
I was very, very shy before.
When I was in Pakistan, I was different.
When I came there, I was quiet.
I didn't say much.
Since I'm coming to this age-line group,
I see this friend.
I go out more and talk more.
I think more socializing now.
Meeting all different backdrop people as well.
It's fascinating.
It's like asking them where you're from.
All sorts of different stories.
I really enjoy them.
I think not any bad now.
With Pakistan, what do you miss the most about?
Most of all, my family.
I came here 20 years after.
I can't travel every day.
I went back five years after.
To take my children home and show them.
When they start schooling, I can't go.
I go by myself.
I leave them here with my husband.
I see them because I have to see my mom and dad.
I still go.
I just go by myself.
I still miss them.
They're gone now.
My brother is still there.
They're living in different parts of the country.
Still in Pakistan.
They're in different places.
They said, you're most welcome.
Come down anytime.
You don't have to be parents.
You can come stay with us.
I just go and stay with them for six weeks.
What do you love the most about your culture?
We are more disciplined.
We respect our elders.
We're quite sharing people.
We share.
I think I mix up quite quickly as well.
I'm not very religious, but I do pray five times.
With that, not so much about the religious aspect,
but even so the religious aspect and the traditions,
what part of your culture have you made an effort to preserve or to keep?
Keep praying.
I wasn't praying before.
Since we opened, I started praying five times before.
Whenever I have the time, I just pray.
Since we're locked in, I do it regularly.
If I don't do it, I miss it.
Then I always ask forgiveness to God.
I think that's it.
Telling the children as well, pray.
Be good to other people.
Just tell them to respect.
If you respect somebody, they respect you back.
If you don't respect anybody, they don't respect you back.
That's the first thing you tell them.
My children do everything to me now.
Sorry.
Speaking about respect, is that something that you felt came straight away from being in Age Alive?
That they respected you and then you were able to give your respect back?
No.
Speaking about respect, do you feel that Age Alive is something that they brought to you?
Is it the fact that they respected you?
He's not going to stop.
When I joined the group, oh dear, sorry about that.
I don't know how to turn it off, okay?
You might just say, because I really just answered, just say, oh God, can you believe that?
When I came to Age Alive, we have a whole different background people.
We're only a few of us Asian in that group.
We have English and Jamaican and all other.
We're quite a mixed group.
We enjoy each other's company as well.
Like we have our elders, like Vanessa and all that, they always speak to us very nicely.
They help us as well.
She always asks us if we see us down.
She always asks, what's wrong?
That's help as well.
Roy is very good.
We help each other.
I always tell them, just tell me what you want and I help you.
I do anything for anybody.
I always ahead of them to do something like helping, not gaining anything, just to help them.
How do you think Age Alive, actually more so,
when you think about your time in Age Alive, is there one event or two, is there moments that really stand out?
First time we did a play with Roy.
I was talking too much now.
Before I was very quiet and shy, sitting in the one corner and don't say anything.
Roy said, no, you come and join us with this play.
I said, no, I'm not joining. I can't.
In front of all these people, I said, no, you can't do it.
He helped me. He said, come on, you can't do it.
First time I did the play in a pill some way.
I was so scared after the play.
I always feel so happy I did that.
And sometime when we did quite a few times singing as well, that's how I enjoyed it.
How do you think Age Alive supports black, Asian or other ethnic groups?
How do you think Age Alive supports black or Asian or other ethnic groups?
I think it's helped me. I don't know about the other people.
I really enjoyed it.
As long as Age Alive is there, I'll be there.
If I don't come one week, I miss them.
I miss the company, miss everything.
Even if we don't edit, we just sit and gossip.
I enjoyed it.
While I was on holiday, I was thinking about the Age Alive.
It's a lovely group.
Because there are all different ethnic people as well.
I enjoy the company.
I don't know, I just enjoy the company.
Have you kept any family heirlooms, like photographs or ornaments?
No.
Because I moved a lot, so I didn't keep any.
I should, but I didn't.
Now somebody told me to just write down the stories wherever I go.
I was thinking I should write it down.
I didn't have anything.
Just photographs, that's all.
Mostly children.
Thank you very much.
Sorry, I was crying.
I was telling Yasmin, did you know when I talk, my tears, the doctor said you don't blink.
Your eyes get dry and it starts watering.
That's what happened to me.
Any good?
Fantastic.